Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going
to be talking about the Darién Scheme.
It is a fascinating period of history,
a supposedly genius idea to transform
global trade and generate vast wealth and
riches for Scotland, all by colonising
a tiny part of Central America.
As you might be able to imagine, it
didn’t quite go to plan, and ended
in the creation of modern Britain.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
The Pan-American highway is, by some
standards, the longest road in the world.
Starting at Prudhoe Bay, in Alaska,
you can drive all the way down through
Canada, the United States, Mexico,
Central America, and continue down
through Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile,
and end up in Argentina, right at the
very southern tip of South America.
The total length is around 30,000
kilometres, and it’s probably more
accurate to call it a large collection
of roads rather than a single road,
as there are multiple ways you can go.
And another important clarification
is that you can’t actually go all
the way from the top to the bottom.
There is a break, an area where the road
comes to a halt, in modern-day Panama.
This is the Darién Gap, the
dense and inhospitable rainforest
area in southeastern Panama
and northwestern Colombia.
To this day, there are no functional
roads, and anyone wishing to cross it
must make the treacherous journey on foot.
But just over 300 years ago, an
enterprising Scottish man called William
Paterson had a plan for this area, a
plan that he thought would make him,
and his country, spectacularly wealthy.
He had spent some time in the
Caribbean and had got an idea.
Ships transporting goods between Asia and
Europe needed to sail all the way around
Cape Horn, at the bottom of South America.
Paterson had a plan to fix this.
Instead of going all the way around, a
ship could sail to modern-day Panama,
unload its cargo, and this would
be transported by land for the 50
kilometres or so to the other side,
where it would be loaded onto another
ship and continue its onward journey.
It was a clever idea, on paper, at least.
Why spend months battling storms and
freezing temperatures around the southern
tip of the continent when you could simply
carry goods across a narrow strip of land?
Now, you might be thinking, “Uhm,
surely a better idea would have
been to dig a canal?”, and of
course, this is the solution that
exists today: the Panama Canal.
Quick side note: we also have an
episode on the Panama Canal, in case you
haven’t listened to that one already.
It’s episode number 411.
But let’s go back to the late 17th
century, and this enterprising
young Scottish merchant.
Paterson’s plan was a land route.
Back in the 1690s, pre the Industrial
Revolution, the idea of a canal
would have been unthinkable.
There was dense jungle and
mountainous ground; engineering
a 50 km canal through all that
would have been utterly impossible.
The technology simply didn’t exist.
Paterson was working within the realms
of what he thought was possible.
Goods would be hauled overland using
pack animals, human labour, and possibly
some sort of rudimentary road or track.
It would be a kind of relay system for
global trade, with New Caledonia, the
name he gave to this planned Scottish
colony, acting as the vital middleman.
What’s more, with its strategic
location in the West Indies, it
could become a booming trading port.
And if it worked, Scotland
wouldn’t just become rich.
It would become powerful, independent,
and a major player in global trade.
That was the dream.
The reality, as we’ll discover,
was something very different.
Now, before we get into what actually
happened and why, it’s worth pausing
for a moment to reflect on what was
going on in Scotland and in Great
Britain at this time, and how all this
might have helped Paterson convince
his countrymen to take a punt on
this scheme halfway across the world.
In the late 17th century, to put
it plainly, things were not going
particularly well in Scotland.
At this point in history, Scotland
was still an independent kingdom.
But, it shared a monarch with England,
following the Union of the Crowns in 1603.
There was a curious situation in which
both countries were ruled by the same
king, William III, at that point in time.
But the two countries remained
politically and economically distinct.
Scotland had its own parliament, its own
legal system, and its foreign policy.
Crucially, it was not part of England’s
growing empire and was excluded from
trading in English colonies, in order
to protect the monopoly and increasing
profits of the East India Company.
So, while technically sovereign,
Scotland found itself in a kind of
geopolitical limbo: not fully in
control of its own economic future,
but also locked out of the prosperity
enjoyed by other imperial powers.
What’s more, in the 1690s, the country
was reeling from a period of extreme
hardship known as the Seven Ill Years.
Crop failures had led to widespread
famine, and tens of thousands of
people died from starvation or disease.
Between direct deaths from disease,
indirect deaths from starvation
and people who fled abroad, it’s
estimated that Scotland lost 20% of
its population in the 1690s alone.
And there wasn’t much it
could do to change its fate.
Trade was dominated by its larger
neighbour, England, which tightly
controlled access to colonial markets.
Scotland had no empire of its own,
no access to the riches flowing in
from the Americas, Africa, or Asia.
And elsewhere in Europe, other colonial
powers were expanding aggressively.
The Spanish had long dominated
Central and South America.
The Dutch controlled major trading
ports in Asia and the Caribbean.
The French were pushing
into North America.
And England was consolidating its own
colonial interests around the globe.
These countries all had state-backed
companies, like the Dutch East India
Company, the English East India Company,
as well as massive naval infrastructure
to support their imperial ambitions.
The Scots had none of this.
The sense of frustration was deep.
The country was politically free, but
economically at the mercy of others.
For many Scots, the idea of creating
their own trade route, their own lucrative
colonial outpost, was not just attractive
— it felt like a matter of survival.
William Paterson believed he
had the answer: the creation
of this land route over Darién.
Now, importantly, most historians
believe that he had never actually
been to Darién, but had heard about
it from a Welsh doctor and explorer.
This doctor, a man called Lionel Wafer,
had told Paterson about the lush forests
and supposedly idyllic climate, and
had also mentioned that the indigenous
people there had been kind and welcoming.
And, well, Paterson had decided
that this was the place.
In fact, he had been talking about
this for a long time, since the
mid-1680s, but few had listened to him.
However, by the late 1690s, people
started to take him more seriously.
Firstly, he was older and better
connected, and had played a key
role in the founding of the Bank of
England, so he commanded more respect.
And secondly, the mood
in Scotland had changed.
Years of famine, economic stagnation,
and exclusion from lucrative
colonial trade had created a
desperate hunger for a bold solution.
Paterson's plan, which had
once been dismissed as fantasy,
now seemed like a lifeline.
He proposed the creation of a new
trading company, The Company of Scotland
Trading to Africa and the Indies.
Of course, this company needed
financial backing, but this proved to
be easier than might have been expected.
In an extraordinary show of national
enthusiasm, roughly one-fifth of all
the money circulating in Scotland at
the time was invested in the company.
From the wealthiest aristocrats to
modest tradesmen, thousands of Scots
bought shares, hoping to strike it rich.
But this wasn’t just an economic
project or financial speculation;
it became a national cause, a
symbol of pride and possibility.
Scotland, it seemed, was ready to stake
its future on this new company, Scotland’s
answer to the East India Company
Importantly, this new company
had a pretty wide remit; it was
intended to go on a bunch of
different missions, not just Darién.
And so in July 1698, the
first ships set sail.
There were five in total, carrying
around 1,200 settlers, along with
supplies, weapons, tools, and, of
course, trade goods, mirrors, combs,
woollen hats, items they believed they
could exchange with local Indigenous
populations or passing merchants.
The first mistake they made was to
set off from Edinburgh, not Glasgow.
Now, in case you need a reminder
of Scottish geography, both
Edinburgh and Glasgow are by the
sea, but Edinburgh is on the east
coast and Glasgow is on the west.
Setting off from Edinburgh meant
going all the way around the north of
Scotland, an often brutal journey, and
in this case, one that took 4 months
just to get around the British Isles.
Nevertheless, spirits were high.
The settlers were optimistic.
They believed they were sailing towards
a new chapter in Scottish history.
But when they arrived at their
destination, the Bay of Darién, on
the Caribbean coast, they found a
land that was far less promising
than the dream they had bought into.
There was no natural harbour, the
ground was waterlogged and uneven,
and the jungle was thick, hot,
and full of unusual creatures.
Worse still, the rainy season had begun,
and their food supplies were already
deteriorating in the humid climate.
Still, they named their settlement
New Edinburgh, hoisted the
Scottish flag, and tried to build
a colony from the ground up.
They built a fort, which they called
St. Andrew, but the place they chose
for this had no fresh water source.
And this was just one
failure among hundreds.
The Scots were, to put it simply,
woefully unprepared for Darién.
They had brought the wrong kind of
supplies, luxury goods they wanted
to trade rather than survival
essentials to keep them alive.
The indigenous Kuna people, who had
lived in the region for centuries, had
little interest in any of the products
the Scots planned to trade with them.
There was some contact, and they
did share some water and supplies,
but there was not nearly enough to
support the Scottish settlement.
Presumably, some assumed that these
strange-looking foreigners would leave,
or that the jungle would do its work.
They didn’t have to
wait particularly long.
Most of the men had no idea how to
survive in this kind of climate, and had
no useful skills for life in the jungle.
They might have been able to survive
a night outdoors in the Scottish
highlands, but a Central American
jungle is something slightly different.
Disease quickly set in: malaria,
dysentery, fever, and within a
few months, hundreds were dead,
with 10 dying every single day.
And the overland trade route?
The grand plan to carry
goods across the isthmus?
It never got off the ground;
they never even started it.
Merely surviving was enough of a
challenge, and one that hundreds failed
to complete; it soon became obvious
that clearing a path through the
jungle and building a road, well, that
was completely out of the question.
And there was another problem.
This territory, this land, had
also been claimed by Spain.
Granted, Spain had shown little interest
in it because of how inhospitable it was.
But the Spanish did not take kindly to
a group of Scots planting a flag in what
they considered to be their backyard.
Now, initially, there was no significant
military action on the part of Spain,
and even if there had been, it would have
been no competition; a fully-fledged army
against a dwindling number of sunburnt,
sickly and starving Scottish traders.
After all, the biggest enemy
the Scots faced wasn’t Spain.
It was the jungle.
By the summer of 1699, just
eight months after arriving, the
jungle had proved victorious.
Of the 1,200 settlers who had
set off, only 300 survived.
They decided to cut their losses and
sail back home with their tails between
their legs, with the ships carrying
more coffins than live passengers.
But the story does not end there.
Back in Scotland, news of the failure
was slow to arrive, and before it
did, a second expedition of 1,000
more settlers had already set sail.
It's difficult to overstate how
tragic and almost surreal this was.
The second group of settlers left
Scotland believing they were going
to reinforce a thriving colony.
They brought ministers,
schoolteachers, and musicians.
They wrote letters full
of hope and ambition.
Some even saw it as a religious
mission, a chance to build a
godly society in a new world.
When they arrived and found
only ruins and graves, the shock
must have been overwhelming.
They tried to continue, but
they were even worse prepared.
After all, they thought they were going
to join a bustling settlement rather
than to have to start from scratch.
And without fresh supplies, without
leadership, and facing the same hostile
conditions, it was only a matter of
time before the same fate awaited them.
Disease, hunger, and tropical
hardships quickly took their toll.
And the Spanish this time did
decide that action was required.
They blockaded the area, cutting off
all potential routes for resupply.
The Scots were given an ultimatum:
surrender, or we’re coming to attack you.
It can’t have been a
particularly difficult decision.
In March 1700, the remaining Scots
surrendered, and fortunately, they
were allowed to leave with their lives.
It was a national disaster.
The total cost of the
Darién Scheme was enormous.
The human cost was vast, with over
2,000 people estimated to have died.
And the financial losses were devastating.
Almost every Scottish noble family
had invested, and many were ruined.
Many ordinary Scottish families,
tradespeople who had put everything they
had into the company, were left destitute.
By some estimates, between a quarter and
half of all the money in circulation in
Scotland at that time had been invested
in the scheme and, puff, it was gone.
The economy was shattered, public
confidence was destroyed, and the dream of
becoming a global trading power was dead.
Ordinary people were devastated.
Entire communities had pooled money
to invest in the Company of Scotland.
Families had lost sons,
brothers, husbands.
The failure was not just
financial; it was deeply personal.
There was public outrage, accusations of
corruption, and cries for accountability.
And yet, there is another part to this
story, one that fuelled resentment
and lasting bitterness in Scotland.
Yes, the conditions were
incredibly hostile, and the
Scots were utterly unprepared.
But there was another factor.
England, partly not to annoy Spain and
partly to protect the interests of its
own East India Company, had quietly
ordered its colonies not to offer any
support to the Scottish expedition.
Ports in Jamaica and
Barbados were closed to them.
English ships were forbidden
from trading with the colony.
Even supplies and
medical aid were refused.
Many Scots saw this as a betrayal; not
just indifference, but active sabotage.
The sense that England had abandoned
the scheme, or even deliberately
undermined it, this only deepened
the wounds when it all fell apart.
And to make matters worse, quiet,
desperate calculations were
being made in the background.
Scotland was broke.
Its political class was facing ruin.
England offered it a lifeline.
It would offer financial compensation
for the losses, but part of this deal
was that Scotland would sign the Acts
of the Union, establishing the Kingdom
of Great Britain, and bringing Scotland
and England together as one country.
To many in Scotland, this was the only
viable path forward, and in 1707, just
a few years after the final failure in
Panama, the Acts of Union were signed,
creating the Kingdom of Great Britain.
The result was a union forged
not in triumph, but in the
ashes of a national catastrophe.
The Darién Scheme, for all its
ambition and vision, did not
just fail to create a colony.
It played a not insignificant part
in the end of Scotland’s independence
and forced it into an alliance
with its historical greatest enemy.
So, to wrap things up, what can we take
from this ill-fated attempt by Scotland to
carve out its own Central American colony?
Clearly, one obvious lesson might
be “mind your own business and
don’t try to colonise other people”.
That is certainly a valid takeaway.
The Darién Scheme was, after
all, a colonial project, one that
conveniently ignored the interests
and sovereignty of the Indigenous
peoples who already lived there.
But perhaps there are other lessons too.
One is the danger of unchecked optimism.
The enthusiasm for the scheme in
Scotland was so overwhelming, so total,
that few people asked hard questions.
There was little scrutiny, no serious
contingency planning, and almost no
real understanding of the land or
people they were trying to settle among.
The national mood swept
away reason and caution.
Another is the risk of putting all
your hopes in a single, grand solution.
For many Scots, this one project was
meant to solve everything: to rescue
the economy, to restore pride, to
assert independence on the global stage.
But when it failed, there
was nothing to fall back on.
The collapse of Darién took
the entire country with it.
And finally, perhaps there is the lesson
that history is rarely clean or fair.
The scheme’s failure wasn’t just
caused by poor planning or disease.
It was also undermined by
geopolitical forces beyond Scotland’s
control: by England’s refusal
to support it, and by Spain’s
determination to defend its empire.
The Scots were caught in the
middle of a much bigger game.
So what started as a bold attempt to
reshape the world ended in disaster.
But it did reshape something — not
global trade, but the political
map of the British Isles.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on The Darien Scheme.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
We actually have lots of listeners
from Colombia, and a fair few from
Panama too, so particularly if this
subject is close to home for you,
I’d love to know what you thought.
Did you know this story?
How does it make you feel, and what
do you think we can take from it?
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.